[New Post] Shift Cloud Costs Left (#755)
build-on-aws/content: posts/shifting-cloud-costs-left-what-it-really-means/index.md

---
title: "Shift Cloud Costs Left: What Does It Really Mean?"
description: What does it really mean to shift cloud costs left, and how to do it
tags:
  - finops
  - cost-optimization
  - essentials
  - cost-control-automation
authorGithubAlias: hassankhosseini
authorName: Hassan Khajeh-Hosseini
date: 2023-09-17
---

### Introduction

> I have some pretty strong beliefs when it comes to cloud costs, how they should be looked at, and who should be responsible for what. 

Reviewer: Great story at the top but as a reader i dont know why i should read this blog? what will i get out of it? 
Also, who is the audience? you talk about devs so I assume it not them but this is a technical blog domain so it may need to adjusted to speak to them

Author: Great point! Let me give it another go

I’ll share those with you, but first, let me take you back to 2011. I was working in London for one of the big consulting companies when I got a call from my brother, Ali, who was doing his PhD in Cloud Computing. He said he had built this prototype that could help companies assess the total cost of ownership of moving to the cloud. I got the train to Edinburgh that Friday, and met up with him to see what he was working on. I quit my job on Monday. We went on to build a company that would be acquired within the year, and then we built one of the first cloud cost management products out there. And, we’ve never left the space.

> I tell this story because I’ve been deeply embedded in cloud costs and the different methods and attempts companies have made to reduce cloud costs, which ones work and which ones don’t. I want to make three points.

Reviewer: Put bullets below on the title of your 3 points

### Understanding Cloud Usage is Key

> If your [FinOps practice](https://www.infracost.io/finops/) is not engineering-led, it’s missing the main point. The cloud is priced based on usage, and only engineers can impact what is used. Let’s look at the [cloud cost formula](https://www.infracost.io/blog/cloud-cost-optimization-formula/):

Reviewer: What does engineering-led mean? Needs a little more

Author: Great point - I moved the text around, and explained it first, then concluded. Does that look better?

Cloud Cost = Usage x Unit Price

> The usage component of this formula is fully within engineering control. Engineering choose which services to use, how they are configured, set up, and even how the usage of those resources scale.

Reviewer: Can you capitalize and bold so we know it related to the calculation clearly

> The unit price component can be a financial decision. However, it is important to optimize this after the usage has been optimized. A thought exercise: If an instance is not being used at all, it doesn’t matter if you save 60% of the unit price of that instance, it’s still 40% waste.

Reviewer: Can you capitalize and bold so we know it related to the calculation clearly. Define what Unit price and Usage is

Usage is the more important part of this formula, and it is fully within engineering control. It is also the harder part of the equation to address and work on.

> <img src="/posts/shifting-cloud-costs-left-what-it-really-means/images/infracost-cost-optimization-formula.png" alt="Cloud cost optimization formula" width="60%" />

Reviewer 2: Please update this to following format:

`![This is the alt text for the image](images/where-this-image-is-stored.png)`

Example:

`![Cloud cost optimization formula](images/infracost-cost-optimization-formula.png)`

![Cloud cost optimization formula](images/infracost-cost-optimization-formula.png)

### Understand Cloud Costs Before Making Changes

> When people talk about shifting cloud costs left, and go on to say the way they achieve it is by alerting engineers when a cost spike or anomaly happens—that’s not shifting left, that’s just marketing.

Reviewer: Very long sentence, please split in two.

> I asked AI to tell me what “shifting left” means: “Shifting left in computing means moving processes or tasks earlier in the development cycle to catch and address issues earlier, rather than waiting until later stages or after deployment”.

Reviewer: Does it really have to AI? Would rather its be a definition that can be linked

Author: I thought it might be fun ☺️ I worded it a little softer and added a confirmation from GitLab too.

> When we talk about shifting FinOps left, it means showing how much the cloud costs <u>before</u> we spend the money, it means checking for the right tags and values <u>before</u> we merge the pull request, it means checking for best practice policies directly in <u>our workflow</u>.

Reviewer: too long a sentence

### Cloud Costs Are Complex

Engineers have code to write, features to ship, bugs to fix, and so on… You can’t just “shift it left” without providing them with the right tools.

I’ve heard people say “engineers don’t take action” when talking about [cost optimization](https://www.infracost.io) tasks. What a strange thing to say, I thought to myself, taking action is literally all that engineers do. They are given fully loaded sprints, and tasked with completing it all in two weeks. If you want more out of the engineering team, provide them with better tools. 

In the great words of Gwen Stefani, “this sh*t is bananas”: [cloud costs are complex](https://www.infracost.io/blog/why-are-cloud-costs-so-complex/). Here at [Infracost](https://www.infracost.io), we have a database of all [resource prices](https://www.infracost.io/blog/why-are-cloud-costs-so-complex/) from AWS, Microsoft Azure, and GCP, and it comes to 4 million prices! How do we expect anyone to know which price points are being used? We need to automate this and put tools in place to help engineers understand the cost impact of the changes they are making before they happen.

### FinOps Should Be Engineering-Led

> Cloud costs should be shifted left — proactive, not reactive, and done so with tooling. I don’t even mind if you don’t use [Infracost (it’s free and open source, so why not)](https://www.infracost.io/), but please help your fellow engineers, your engineering managers, and FinOps folks by providing them with the right tools built into their workflows! Share the love. Cheers.

Reviewer: Can you be more explicit for the call to action?

![Cloud cost optimization formula](images/infracost-cost-optimization-formula.png)

**Cloud Cost = Usage x Unit Price**

The **Usage** component refers to the cloud resources you are provisioning - for example you have chosen an Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) instance or a serverless AWS Lambda function to run your feature. This component of this formula is fully within your control. Engineering choose which services to use, how they are configured, set up, and even how the usage of those resources scale.

The **Unit Price** component refers to the rate you pay per-service per time-unit. For example, EC2 instances have a specific price rate based on instance size, family, region, OS etc. These resources can be purchased in multiple ways (on-demand, Reserved, Savings Plans etc). How the services are paid for is a financial decision. It doesn't impact the service and how it is run or managed, it just impacts the rate which will be charged.

The **Usage** component is the more important part of this formula. If an EC2 instance is not being used at all, it doesn’t matter if you save 60% of the cost via a purchase plan, it’s still 40% waste.

> This is why the [FinOps practice](https://www.infracost.io/finops/) should be engineering-led. The core work that needs to be done under the FinOps umbrella requires engineering effort. Engineering is required for cost optimization, tagging of resources, and right-sizing decisions. Engineering is required to do the cost-benefit analysis for each action.

Reviewer 2: We have right sizing article published, in case you want to link to it

https://community.aws/posts/rightsizing-the-right-way

Author: Also great link - will update!

Shifting left is defined as moving processes or tasks earlier in the development cycle to catch and address issues earlier, rather than waiting until later stages or after deployment.

Setting up alerting when a cost spike or anomaly happens is great, but that's not shifting left.

When we talk about shifting FinOps left, it means knowing how much the cloud costs ***before*** we spend the money. It means checking for the right tags and values ***before*** we merge the pull request. It means checking for best practice policies directly in ***our workflow***.

Keep this information in mind - at the end of this article, I'm going to show you a tool that you can deploy to automate these tasks.

### 3. Cloud Costs Are Complex

*We have code to write, features to ship, bugs to fix, and so on. Testing was shifted left; security was shifted left; if we keep shifting things left, we won't be coding anymore!* ... I hear what you are saying, and I agree. We can't just "shift it left" without putting in tools to help. We need the right information at the right time appended directly in our workflow.

> In the great words of Gwen Stefani, *“this sh!t is bananas”*: [cloud costs are complex](https://www.infracost.io/blog/why-are-cloud-costs-so-complex/). Here at [Infracost](https://www.infracost.io), we have a multi-cloud database of all resource prices from the major cloud providers, and it comes to 4 million prices! How do we expect anyone to know which price points are being used? We need to automate this to understand the cost impact of the changes before we spend the money. Non-engineering people are always surprised when I tell them that the cloud doesn't have a checkout screen!

Reviewer 2: I am a bit lost on this sentence formation. 
_Here at Infracost, we have a multi-cloud database of all resource prices from the major cloud providers, and it comes to 4 million prices!_

Should we make it something like:

_At Infracost, we maintain a comprehensive multi-cloud database comprising all resource prices from major cloud providers, totalling over 4 million prices!_

Author: I like it! Will update

That's the core reason why Infracost exists. We give you that checkout screen experience by simplifying these complex cloud costs and giving you an easy and automated way to know how much it will cost as you make changes to your infrastructure.

### FinOps Should Be Engineering-Led

> Here is the first step to take: [Infracost is free and open source](https://www.infracost.io/), install it into your GitHub or GitLab now.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you wanted to get started managing your costs, you can install [Infracost](https://www.infracost.io/) into your GitHub or GitLab accounts.
```

Reviewer 3: @hassankhosseini : Suggesting this change, the previous version is too strong of a product pitch, please review.

Author: Looks good - changes committed.

  - cost-control-automation
authorGithubAlias: hassankhosseini
authorName: Hassan Khajeh-Hosseini
date: 2023-09-18
---

### Introduction

I have some pretty strong beliefs when it comes to cloud costs, how they should be looked at, and who should be responsible for what. 

First, lets go back to 2011. I was working in London for a major consulting company when my brother, Ali, who was doing his PhD in Cloud Computing, called me. He told me about a prototype he had built that could help companies assess the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) of transitioning to the cloud. I got the train to Edinburgh that Friday, talked to him over the weekend, and quit my job on Monday. From there, we developed one of the first cloud cost management products available. And since then, we have remained in this field.

I tell this story because I’ve been deeply embedded in cloud costs and the different methods and attempts companies have made to reduce cloud costs, which ones work and which ones don’t. 

> I want to make three points in this blog. These points are what you, as engineers can take to your management team to push for engineering led FinOps practice. I will also show you what tool you should use as the first step to shift cloud costs left (it's open source too!).

Reviewer: comma after engineers

Reviewer: for **a** engineering led ...

Reviewer: _I will also show you want tool is available as a first step...._

![Cloud cost optimization formula](images/infracost-cost-optimization-formula.png)

**Cloud Cost = Usage x Unit Price**

The **Usage** component refers to the cloud resources you are provisioning - for example you have chosen an EC2 instance or a serverless Lambda function to run your feature. This component of this formula is fully within your control. Engineering choose which services to use, how they are configured, set up, and even how the usage of those resources scale.

The **Unit Price** component refers to the rate you pay per-service per time-unit. For example, AWS EC2 instances have a specific price rate based on instance size, family, region, OS etc. These resources can be purchased in multiple ways (on-demand, Reserved, Savings Plans etc). How the services are paid for is a financial decision. It doesn't impact the service and how it is run or managed, it just impacts the rate which will be charged. 

The **Usage** component is the more important part of this formula. If an instance is not being used at all, it doesn’t matter if you save 60% of the cost via a purchase plan, it’s still 40% waste.

> This is why the [FinOps practice](https://www.infracost.io/finops/) should be engineering-led. The core work that needs to be done under the FinOps umbrella requires engineering effort. Engineering is required for cost optimization, tagging of resources, and right-sizing decisions. Engineering is required to do the cost-benefit analysis for each action.

Reviewer: Add a sentence at the end on what you want them to do with this information 
e.g. try working out your unit cost ...

### 2. Understand Cloud Costs Before Making Changes

Many companies discuss the concept of shifting cloud costs left, but what they actually do is not shifting left. Setting up alerting when a cost spike or anomaly happens is great, but that's not shifting left. When you receive a production alert and quickly address the issue, that's not shifting left, the same concept applies to costs.

> Hey Chat GPT, define “shifting left”: “Shifting left in computing means moving processes or tasks earlier in the development cycle to catch and address issues earlier, rather than waiting until later stages or after deployment”. That's a pretty good [definition](https://about.gitlab.com/topics/ci-cd/shift-left-devops/#how-to-shift-left-with-continuous-integration).

Reviewer: Please remove the chat GPT stuff and say the defintion. 
I would reorder to be 
Many companies discuss the concept of shifting cloud costs left, but what they actually do is not shifting left. Setting up alerting when a cost spike or anomaly happens is great, but that's not shifting left.
shifting left is defined as.... 
Setting up alerting when a cost spike or anomaly happens is great, but that's not shifting left. When you receive a production alert and quickly address the issue, that's not shifting left, the same concept applies to costs.

> When we talk about shifting FinOps left, it means knowing how much the cloud costs <u>before</u> we spend the money. It means checking for the right tags and values <u>before</u> we merge the pull request. It means checking for best practice policies directly in <u>our workflow</u>.

Reviewer: Again, what do you want them to do after

### 3. Cloud Costs Are Complex

We have code to write, features to ship, bugs to fix, and so on. Testing was shifted left; security was shifted left; if we keep shifting things left, we won't be coding anymore! ... I hear you say, and I agree. We can't just "shift it left" without putting in tools to help. We need the right information at the right time appended directly in our workflow.

> In the great words of Gwen Stefani, “this sh*t is bananas”: [cloud costs are complex](https://www.infracost.io/blog/why-are-cloud-costs-so-complex/). Here at [Infracost](https://www.infracost.io), we have a database of all resource prices from AWS, Microsoft Azure, and GCP, and it comes to 4 million prices! How do we expect anyone to know which price points are being used? We need to automate this to understand the cost impact of the changes before we spend the money. Non-engineering people are always surprised when I tell them that the cloud doesn't't have a checkout screen!

Reviewer: Just say multi cloud, don't list

> In the great words of Gwen Stefani, “this sh*t is bananas”: [cloud costs are complex](https://www.infracost.io/blog/why-are-cloud-costs-so-complex/). Here at [Infracost](https://www.infracost.io), we have a database of all resource prices from AWS, Microsoft Azure, and GCP, and it comes to 4 million prices! How do we expect anyone to know which price points are being used? We need to automate this to understand the cost impact of the changes before we spend the money. Non-engineering people are always surprised when I tell them that the cloud doesn't't have a checkout screen!

Reviewer: Typo doesn't't

> In the great words of Gwen Stefani, “this sh*t is bananas”: [cloud costs are complex](https://www.infracost.io/blog/why-are-cloud-costs-so-complex/). Here at [Infracost](https://www.infracost.io), we have a database of all resource prices from AWS, Microsoft Azure, and GCP, and it comes to 4 million prices! How do we expect anyone to know which price points are being used? We need to automate this to understand the cost impact of the changes before we spend the money. Non-engineering people are always surprised when I tell them that the cloud doesn't't have a checkout screen!

Reviewer: Add at the end something like
thats why, us at infra cost want to make this information easier for you to see ...
